# Legal Information

CHAPTER XXII

UNDERTRIAL PRISONERS

Classification of Under Trial

22.01. The classification of undertrial prisoners should be done only on
the basis of security, discipline and institutional programme. No
classification on the basis of social status should be attempted. The
entitlement of diet, clothing, bedding and interview will be the same as
applicable to other categories of prison. Undertrial prisoners should be
classified as under:

Category ‘I’: Prisoners involved in terrorist and extremists
activities (special security prisoners (limited and with the
permission and higher authority)

Category ‘II’: Dangerous prisoners involved in murders, dacoity,
robbery, rape cases, habitual offenders, previous escapes and drug
peddlers.

Note: (i)
(ii)

(iii)

Admission

Mentally sick prisoners, young offenders and women
under protective custody will not be lodged with
undertrial prisoners although classified as under trial.
Courts will send intimation to prison authorities about
under trial prisoners who have turned approvers or have
made confessions.

An accused person detained under section 122 (2) of the
Criminal Procedure Code, must be treated as an
undertrial prisoner until his case has been decided by the
Sessions Court or High Court.

22.02. An Assistant Superintendent should be in charge of all work
pertaining to undertrial prisoners;

22.03. No person shall be admitted into a prison as an undertrial
prisoner unless accompanied by the following documents: -

1. (a) A remand warrant in the prescribed form, signed dated
and sealed by the competent authority. There should be
separate writ, warrant or order for every prisoner, even if
two or more prisoners have been jointly accused;
2. (b) Identification roll containing at least two specific
permanent identification marks like deep scars, birth
marks, moles indicating their exact location on the body;
    
    (iii) Discrepancies in remand warrant. - The officer on duty
    is authorized to refuse admission of an undertrial prisoner
    

in whose case the remand warrant is not sent in the
appropriate form or the warrant is found to contain (i)
discrepancies in name or identification, (ii) omissions of the
signature of the competent authority. In such a case, a
report should be sent in the prescribed form to the
authorities concerned;

(iv) The property of an undertrial prisoner shall remain in
the court;
(v) Children. - Children of women undertrial prisoners
may be admitted if suitable arrangements for their care
cannot be easily made outside;

(vi) Food. - If an undertrial prisoner has not been in the
prison previously, it is the duty of the police, or the military
escort officer, to see that the undertrial prisoner is given
food before he is taken to the prison, if he is likely to arrive
there too late for the prison meal. If the police or military
escort reports that the undertrial prisoner has not been
supplied with food, prison authorities should make
necessary arrangements for the issue of food to him. In case
the undertrial prisoner is admitted after the prison meals
have been served, or after lock-up, food stuff like parched
rice, parched gram, groundnuts, etc., should be issued to
him as per prescribed scale;

(vii)

Admission hours

(viii)

It is the duty of every prison officer to endeavour to
ascertain whether an undertrial prisoner has been
previously convicted. Such information, as and when
it is available, should be immediately forwarded to
the Superintendent of police for necessary action.

(a)

(b)

Undertrial prisoners should be admitted
during usual working hours of the prison.
After lock-up, no undertrial prisoners should
be admitted except women offenders and
prisoners in whose case identification parade is
to be held. Prisoners received after the lock-up
hour should be confined in a separate place
specially earmarked for such purpose.

While undertrial prisoners are being escorted,
care should be taken to see that they reach the
destination before the lock-up hour. If
undertrial prisoners are likely to reach the
destination after lock-up hour, the transferring
prison or sub-prison or the police or military
officials should send sufficient advance
intimation to the prison where the undertrial
prisoners are being escorted.

Approvers

22.04. When an undertrial prisoner has been admitted by the court as
an approver or a confessing accused he should be kept separate from
others concerned in the same case. Where there are separate cells or
compartment in the undertrial ward, these should be utilized for the
purpose. If there is no separate compartment, such prisoners may be
kept in separate cells by day and in separate wards by night, but care
must be taken that they are not kept in solitary confinement.

22.05. Any special direction as to the separation of an undertrial
prisoner given by the Judge or Magistrate should be carried out. Such
separation should be unaccompanied by any irksome condition
beyond those necessary to secure the object in view, namely, to
prevent him from communicating directly or indirectly with other
prisoners concerned in the same or other case.

Identification for court purposes

22.06. Undertrial prisoners shall not be allowed to cut or shave their
hair on their heads or faces or in any way to alter their personal
appearance, so as to make it difficult to recognize them. They shall
not, however, be prevented from changing their clothes, provided that
their appearance is not materially altered when they are presented for
identification in the prison or sub-prison, or when sent to court for
trial;

22.07. The police shall give intimation to prison authorities of cases in
which identification of under trial prisoners is to be carried out and
shall give full description of growth of hair, moustache, beard, etc.,
which the undertrial prisoners had at the time of arrest;

22.08. Test identification should be held as per rules framed for this
purpose.

Police interrogation

22.09. Only such police officers as have been authorized by the Judge
or Magistrate, should be allowed to interrogate an undertrial prisoner
while in prison custody. Such interviews should be held in the
presence and within the hearing of a prison officer.

Facilities

22.10. The following facilities should be extended to all undertrial
prisoners:-

1. (a) Legal defence,
2. (b) Interviews with lawyers or family members

(for legal purposes ) ,

(c) Signing Vakalatnama,

1. (d) Delegation of power of attorney,
2. (e) Execution of will,
3. (f) Essential religious necessities as per rules,
4. (g) Applications to courts for legal aid at
    
    Government cost as per provisions of law.
    
5. (h) Other applications to courts,
6. (i) Application to Legal Aid Societies for free
legal aid,

22.11. Such facilities as are sanctioned by the State Government
should be extended to undertrial prisoners.

Food.

22.12. Food from outside may be allowed subject following
conditions:-

Clothing

(a) A written undertaking shall be given by the
undertrial prisoner and the supplier of food that they
are entirely responsible for the wholesomeness of such
food and that prison administration will not be
responsible for any mishap that may happen. Food for
only one day’s requirement of the undertrial prisoner
shall be allowed at one time. Food articles will be
tasted by the person who delivers the food. The food
will be delivered at hours prescribed by the prison
authorities. Food shall be eaten in the prescribed area
and during prescribed hours only. During
emergencies or epidemics or for reasons of health of
the undertrial prisoner, outside food may be
disallowed. The Superintendent has the authority to
disallow or discontinue this concession at any time.

(b) Prisoners allowed to receive outside food,
shall not be given prison food.

(c) Undertrial prisoners should not be allowed to
cook their food separately in the institution;

22.13. Usual private clothing to meet reasonable requirements should
be allowed to undertrial prisoners. Such articles of clothing as will
affect the security requirements of the institution should not be
allowed. An undertrial prisoner who has no sufficient clothing of his
own may be provided with the same at Government cost at the
prescribed scale. Such clothing may be allowed to be retained by the
undertrial prisoner even after his release. Private articles bearing marks
or symbols of political affiliations shall not be allowed to be kept or
used by undertrial prisoners;

Letters

22.14. On the initial admission of a prisoner, a printed card should be
sent at Government cost to his family. This card should contain
information on the following points; the inmate’s institutional number
and address, brief summary of rules regarding interviews, letters, etc.,

22.15. Four letters per calendar month, two at his cost, and two at
Government cost, shall be allowed to be written by an undertrial
prisoner,

22.16. Additional letters for legal purposes such as arranging defence,
bail, and security may be allowed normally at the prisoner’s own cost,

22.17. Undertrial prisoners may be allowed to purchase from the prison
canteen, a reasonable supply of stationery and writing material which
should be marked and serially numbered by the prison authorities.

Interviews

22.18. When a legal adviser desires an interview with an undertrial
prisoner, he shall apply in writing, giving his name, address and
profession and satisfy the Superintendent as to his bona fides. Every
interview between an undertrial prisoner and his legal adviser shall
take place within the sight but out of hearing of a prison official. One
interview per calendar week with family members or relatives or close
friends may be allowed. In deserving cases additional interviews for
legal purposes may be granted in the discretion of the Superintendent.
Undertrial prisoners should not be granted interviews with convicted
prisoners unless they are very close relatives;

Canteen

22.19. An undertrial prisoner may make purchases from the canteen up
to Rs.20per month as per canteen rules;

Undertrial prisoners of category I.

22.20. All facilities given to category-2 undertrial prisoners should be
extended to undertrial prisoners placed in category-I. The following
additional concessions should be granted to undertrial prisoners
placed in category:-

1. Permission to make purchases from the
canteen facilities up to Rs.30 per month as per
canteen rules.
2. Getting clothes laundered from the prison
laundry once a week at their own cost.
3. Haircut once in two weeks,
4. Necessary furniture and bedding,
5. One additional interview per calendar week.

Production before court

22.21. An undertrial prisoner shall be produced before the court, on the
due date of hearing, in person. However, for extension of detention in
custody, the prisoner may be produced before the court either in
person or through electronic media like, video-linkage. For this
purpose a court diary shall be maintained in which all relevant entries
of production before various court shall be made. These entries should
be made daily by the officials concerned and should be daily
supervised by the officer in charge of undertrial work.

Requisition of escort

22.22. On the basis of the court diary, requisition for police escort
should be sent sufficiently in advance. Information about women,
adolescent, juvenile undertrial prisoners and as far as possible about
violent, dangerous and notorious undertrial prisoners should be sent to
the police authorities while requisitioning the escort.

Sick prisoners

22.23. If an undertrial prisoner is sick and the Medical Officer certifies
the prisoners inability to attend the court, he should not be produced
before the court. In such an event, the medical certificate should be
forwarded to the court.

Feeding

22.24. Before undertrial prisoners are sent to the court, the usual
morning meals should be served.

Articles allowed to be taken while going to the court

22.25. While going to the court, the undertrial prisoner should return
all prison articles issued to him. Excepting clothes on his person and
papers pertaining to his case, the undertrial prisoner shall not be
allowed to carry any other articles with him. In case the undertrial
prisoner wants to take his cash for legal purposes, the same should be
forwarded to the court through the police escort. This amount may be
utilized by the undertrial prisoner under orders of the court for
purpose like legal defence, cost of copies, etc. The disposal of this
amount should be certified by the police and the prisoner in the
appropriate column of the register prescribed for such purpose. Under
no circumstances, should the undertrial prisoner be allowed to carry
cash or valuable, if any, on his person.

Search

22.26. Before being sent to the court, and after having been received
back from the court, all undertrial prisoners shall be thoroughly
searched.

Transport

22.27. For transporting undertrial prisoners to and from the court and
other destinations, necessary arrangements for conveyance should be
made by the police authorities. If a separate conveyance is not
provided for women and adolescent undertrial prisoners, the common
conveyance should have separate compartments for women and
adolescent undertrial prisoners.

Handcuffing

22.28. All undertrial prisoners are liable to be handcuffed except (a)
Women (b) juveniles, (c) undertrial prisoners who are seriously ill, (d)
undertrial prisoners in whose case Government orders have been
issued directing that such prisoner or group of prisoners should not
be handcuffed:

22.29. Undertrial prisoners should not normally be handcuffed
except:-

1. (a) Prisoners involved in serious and violent offences,
2. (b) Prisoners having notorious or dangerous background,
3. (c) Violent,aggressiveandrefractoryprisoners,
4. (d) Prisoners who have previously escaped.

22.30. Handcuffing of undertrial prisoners may be done in the
discretion of the produced before the court, except with the permission
of the court.

Court Premises

22.31. Only under written orders of the court, undertrial prisoners may
be granted interviews for legal purposes by the officers in charge of
police escort on the court premises. Proper record of such interviews
should be maintained at the courts concerned and intimation sent to
prison authorities in the prescribed form:

22.32. Undertrial prisoners shall not be allowed directly to receive any
cash valuable articles while under escort or while on the court
premises. Such cash or articles should be credited, under proper
authorization;

22.33. The police escort shall not allow any eatables or prohibited
articles to undertrial prisoners during their journey between the court
and the prison or on the court premises;

22.34. Undertrial prisoners should be thoroughly searched before being
taken into the court-room;

Return to the prison

22.35. As soon as the court work is over, such undertrial prisoners as
have been remanded to prison custody should be brought back to the
prison at least one hour before lock-up.

22.36. On return of an undertrial prisoner from the court to the prison
gate, if any unauthorized article is found or a special circumstance or
an irregularity is noted by the prison officer on duty, he shall forthwith
report the matter to the senior officer on duty and if necessary, to the
District Superintendent to Police for action. Such cash as is brought by
the police escort should be recorded in the register and deposited in
the prison office under intimation to the undertrial prisoner.

Production of undertrial prisoners in other States

22.37. When an undertrial prisoner is required to be sent to another
State for trial, the State from where the undertrial prisoner is sent
should arrange for the escort. Travel and other incidental expenses of
the escort and of the undertrial prisoner should be borne by the
requisitioning State.

Production of undertrial prisoners before court in civil suit proceedings

22.38. Unless ordered by the District Judge, no undertrial prisoner
shall be produced before court for civil suit proceedings.

Prevention of undue detention

22.39 .An undertrial prisoner whose case is being tried by a
Magistrate shall be produced before the Magistrate at least once in
fifteen days for the purpose of further order Upon the expiry of each
period of remand, the prisoner shall be placed before the Magistrate;

22.40. A statement in the prescribed form showing details of undertrial
prisoner whose cases have been pending for more than three months
should be sent on the fifth day of each month to the Sessions Judge or
District Magistrate with relevant extracts to the court concerned.

Additional Cases

22.41. When additional case/cases are pending against a prisoner, the
following action should be taken:-

1. (a) Entries of additional cases in red ink on the remand
warrant in appropriate columns of undertrial register and
court diary should be made;
2. (b) Intimation to the court/courts concerned about pending
cases stating whether the prisoner is on bail or not in
connection with that case or those cases should be sent;
3. (c) Intimation to police escort in the prescribed form should
be sent;

22.42. When an undertrial prisoner is wanted for trial in another
case/cases for which he is not on bail, the court concerned will issue
separate remand warrants. In the event of grant of bail in the second
case or other cases, due intimation shall be sent by the courts to the
prison authorities;

22.43. When an undertrial prisoner confined in a prison or sub-prison
is required for another case/cases for which he is on bail, the court
concerned will duly intimate the prison authorities;

22.44. In the case of an undertrial prisoner having two cases pending
against him, for which he is not on bail, an endorsement in red ink
should be made each time he is sent to the court.

Discipline

22.45. No convicted prisoner shall be kept in the same area in which
undertrial prisoners are kept, or be allowed to have contact with
undertrial prisoners. Except prisoners working in essential prison
services like conservancy, etc. no convicted prisoner shall be allowed to
enter the under-trial yard or block. As soon as the work is over, these
prisoners should be withdrawn from the yard or block. In all matters
where undertrial prisoners are concerned, no convicted prisoner shall
be used for supervision or similar purpose. All such matters should be
handled by staff members.

Work

22.46. Undertrial prisoners shall clean the yards, barracks and cells
where they are kept. Undertrial prisoners should be detailed for this
work. Such work may be allotted on a group basis, so that through the
cumulative work of all the undertrial prisoners, the yards, barracks,
cells will get cleaned up. It will also be incumbent on all undertrial
prisoners to keep their own clothing, bedding and equipment properly
washed, cleaned, and disinfected;

22.47. If undertrial prisoner volunteer to work, suitable work, if
possible, be given to them. Wages may be paid to them according to
schedules of standard tasks and wages, as fixed by the State
Government. Employment of under trial prisoners on extramural work
is strictly prohibited. In no case, should undertrial prisoners be

employed outside their own enclosure or in work-sheds and areas
where other convicted prisoners are working.

Transfer

22.48. During an emergency or on administrative grounds, the
Inspector-General is authorized to transfer undertrial prisoners from
on prison to another within the State, provided that if a prisoner is
transferred to a place outside the jurisdiction of the court concerned,
prompt intimation should be sent to the court. The prisoner shall be
produced before the court on the due date.

Serious Illness

22.49. When an undertrial prisoner is seriously ill, the Superintendent
shall send a report, along with a medical report, to the court concerned
in order that if the law permits and the court thinks fit, the prisoner
may be released on bail.

Transfer to an Outside Hospital

22.50. When the prison Medical Officer recommends that in the
interest of the health of the undertrial prisoner, he should be
transferred to a hospital outside the prison, immediate action should
be taken and the matter reported to the court concerned.

Death

22.51. The death of an undertrial prisoner shall be promptly reported
to the court under whose orders he was detained.

Conviction

22.52. When an undertrial prisoner is convicted, the officer in charge of
undertrial prisoners should hand over all connected papers and
records together with cash and private property if any to the officer in
charge of admission of convicted prisoners who will attend to the usual
routine in this respect. On conviction, an undertrial prisoner should be
transferred to the yard meant for newly admitted convicts.

Release
Release from the court

22.53. When an undertrial prisoner is discharged or released from the
court, an endorsement to that effect will be made by the court in the
prescribed form. On receipt of such intimation, entries in the
appropriate columns of the undertrial register should be made;

22.54. If the undertrial prisoner is released from the court he should
claim his personal property if any from the prison authorities within
three months, failing which the same should be forwarded to the police
for disposal.

Release from prison

22.55. Release orders and bail bonds will be sent through post or
through the peon of the court. If any private person brings such
documents, the same should not be accepted at the prison office;

22.56. On receipt of a bail bond or release order prompt action should
be taken. In a Central or a large District prison, an undertrial prisoner
should normally be released within four hours of the receipt of the bail
bond or release order. A bail bond or release order reaching the prison
after lock-up should not be received.

Release Procedure

22.57. While releasing an undertrial prisoner the officer in charge
should attend to the following points:-

1. (a) Scrutiny of the bail bond or release order with relevant
original papers and record,
2. (b) Checking whether any other case is pending against the
undertrial prisoner,
3. (c) Checking of the identify of the undertrial prisoner,
4. (d) Handing over of the cash and property of the undertrial
    
    prisoner;
    

22.58. The undertrial prisoner should be informed of the contents of
the bail bond prior to his release;

22.59. If the undertrial prisoner has not got sufficient money, he/she
may be given travel warrant and if his/her journey home is likely to
take more than 12 hours; he may be given subsistence money;

22.60. After release the bail bond should be duly returned to the court
concerned along with a certificate of release.

Women Undertrial Prisoners

22.61. Women undertrial prisoner should normally be escorted by
women police. When there are no women police available, they should
be accompanied by woman Prison Guard. As far as is practicable,
separate conveyance should be provided for the transport of women
undertrial prisoners;

22.62. Women staff members shall be in charge of women undertrial
prisoners. The Lady Assistant Superintendent or Senior Matron should

be present at the time to admission and release of women undertrial
prisoner. She should attend to all work pertaining to the women
undertrial prisoners;

22.63. As far as possible, women undertrial prisoners should be handed
over to their relatives after release. If this is not possible, a woman
police or woman prison guard should escort the released woman
undertrial prisoner to the nearest station or transport bus stand.

Daily Routine And Programme For Undertrial Prisoners

22.64. The following daily routine should be adjusted to suit local
conditions:

1. (i) Early Morning
    
    Toilet,
    Meditation,
    Preparation for opening,
    Unlocking according to conditions of visibility
    Counting,
    Search,
    Leaving the barrack or cell.
    
2. (ii) Morning
Toilet,
    
    Prayers,
    P.T.drill,individual and group exericise,
    Morning light meal,
    Cleaning of barracks cells, yards, open spaces
    Cleaning of equipment,
    Work on voluntary basis,
    Educational classes,
    Washing of clothes and bath,
    Meal and rest.
    
3. (iii) Afternoon
Newspapers, library books,
Educational classes,
Social education,
Toilet,
Games and reaction for one hour according to institutional

facilities.

1. (iv) Early evening
    
    Wash,
    Evening meal,
    Preparation for lock-up
    Counting,
    Search,
    Lock-up at dusk.
    
2. (v) Evening
Reading newspapers – library books,

TV/Radio music,
Meditation,
To bed.

Programmes on Sundays and Prison Holidays

22.65. On Sundays and prison holidays the following routine should
be followed subject to adjustment to suit local conditions:-

1. (i) Early morning
    
    As in rule 22.64.(i)
    
2. (ii) Morning
    
    Toilet,
    Exercise,
    Light meal,
    General cleaning of barracks, cells open spaces,
    Cleaning of equipment,
    
    Washing of clothes and bath,
    Inspection of equipment,
    Meal and rest.
    

(iii) Afternoon
Educational Films :

Group Music, :

As per schedule for each group and
in

accordance with institutional
facilities.

Newspapers, Library books, radio/TV
Toilet,
Games (one hour).

1. (iv) Early evening
As in rule 22.64.(iv)
2. (v) Evening
As in rule 22.64.(v)

CHAPTER V
ARREST OF PERSONS

41. When police may arrest without warrant.—(1) Any police officer may without an order from a
Magistrate and without a warrant, arrest any person—

1[(a) who commits, in the presence of a police officer, a cognizable offence;

(b) against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible information has been
received, or a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed a cognizable offence punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may be less than seven years or which may extend to seven years
whether with or without fine, if the following conditions are satisfied, namely:—

(i) the police officer has reason to believe on the basis of such complaint, information, or
suspicion that such person has committed the said offence;

(ii) the police officer is satisfied that such arrest is necessary—

(a) to prevent such person from committing any further offence; or

(b) for proper investigation of the offence; or

(c) to prevent such person from causing the evidence of the offence to disappear or
tampering with such evidence in any manner; or

(d) to prevent such person from making any inducement, threat or promise to any person
acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the
Court or to the police officer; or

(e) as unless such person is arrested, his presence in the Court whenever required cannot
be ensured,

and the police officer shall record while making such arrest, his reasons in writing:

2[Provided that a police officer shall, in all cases where the arrest of a person is not required under
the provisions of this sub-section, record the reasons in writing for not making the arrest.];

(ba) against whom credible information has been received that he has committed a cognizable
offence punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to more than seven years whether
with or without fine or with death sentence and the police officer has reason to believe on the basis of
that information that such person has committed the said offence;]

(c) who has been proclaimed as an offender either under this Code or by order of the State
Government; or

(d) in whose possession anything is found which may reasonably be suspected to be stolen
property and who may reasonably be suspected of having committed an offence with reference to
such thing; or

(e) who obstructs a police officer while in the execution of his duty, or who has escaped, or
attempts to escape, from lawful custody; or

(f) who is reasonably suspected of being a deserter from any of the Armed Forces of the Union; or

(g) who has been concerned in, or against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or
credible information has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists, of his having been
concerned in, any act committed at any place out of India which, if committed in India, would
have been punishable as an offence, and for which he is, under any law relating to extradition, or
otherwise, liable to be apprehended or detained in custody in India; or

(h) who, being a released convict, commits a breach of any rule made under sub-section (5) of
section 356; or

1. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 5, for cls. (a) and (b) (w.e.f. 1-11-2010).
2. Ins. by Act 41 of 2010, s. 2 (w.e.f. 2-11-2010).

40

(i) for whose arrest any requisition, whether written or oral, has been received from another
police officer, provided that the requisition specifies the person to be arrested and the offence or other
cause for which the arrest is to be made and it appears therefrom that the person might lawfully be
arrested without a warrant by the officer who issued the requisition.

1[(2) Subject to the provisions of section 42, no person concerned in a non-cognizable offence or
against whom a complaint has been made or credible information has been received or reasonable
suspicion exists of his having so concerned, shall be arrested except under a warrant or order of a
Magistrate.]

2[41A. Notice of appearance before police officer.—(1) 3[The police officer shall], in all cases
where the arrest of a person is not required under the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 41, issue a
notice directing the person against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible information
has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed a cognizable offence, to appear
before him or at such other place as may be specified in the notice.

(2) Where such a notice is issued to any person, it shall be the duty of that person to comply with the
terms of the notice.

(3) Where such person complies and continues to comply with the notice, he shall not be arrested in
respect of the offence referred to in the notice unless, for reasons to be recorded, the police officer is of
the opinion that he ought to be arrested.

4[(4) Where such person, at any time, fails to comply with the terms of the notice or is unwilling to
identify himself, the police officer may, subject to such orders as may have been passed by a competent
Court in this behalf, arrest him for the offence mentioned in the notice.]

41B. Procedure of arrest and duties of officer making arrest.—Every police officer while making
an arrest shall—

(a) bear an accurate, visible and clear identification of his name which will facilitate easy
identification;

(b) prepare a memorandum of arrest which shall be—
(i) attested by at least one witness, who is a member of the family of the person arrested or a

respectable member of the locality where the arrest is made;
(ii) countersigned by the person arrested; and

(c) inform the person arrested, unless the memorandum is attested by a member of his family, that
he has a right to have a relative or a friend named by him to be informed of his arrest.

41C. Control room at districts.—(1) The State Government shall establish a police control room—

(a) in every district; and

(b) at State level.
(2) The State Government shall cause to be displayed on the notice board kept outside the control rooms at

every district, the names and addresses of the persons arrested and the name and designation of the police
officers who made the arrests.

(3) The control room at the Police Headquarters at the State level shall collect from time to time, details
about the persons arrested, nature of the offence with which they are charged and maintain a database for the
information of the general public.

41D. Right of arrested person to meet an advocate of his choice during interrogation.—When any
person is arrested and interrogated by the police, he shall be entitled to meet an advocate of his choice during
interrogation, though not throughout interrogation.]

42. Arrest on refusal to give name and residence.—(1) When any person who, in the presence of a
police officer, has committed or has been accused of committing a non-cognizable offence refuses, on demand

1. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 5, for sub-section (2) (w.e.f. 1-11-2010).
2. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-2010).
3. Subs. by Act 41 of 2010, s. 3, for “The police officer may” (w.e.f. 2-11-2010).
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for sub-section (4) (w.e.f. 2-11-2010).

41

of such officer, to give his name and residence or gives a name or residence which such officer has reason to
believe to be false, he may be arrested by such officer in order that his name or residence may be ascertained.

(2) When the true name and residence of such person have been ascertained, he shall be released on his
executing a bond, with or without sureties, to appear before a Magistrate if so required:

Provided that, if such person is not resident in India, the bond shall be secured by a surety or sureties
resident in India.

(3) Should the true name and residence of such person not be ascertained within twenty-four hours from
the time of arrest or should he fail to execute the bond, or, if so required, to furnish sufficient sureties, he shall
forthwith be forwarded to the nearest Magistrate having jurisdiction.

43. Arrest by private person and procedure on such arrest.—(1) Any private person may arrest or
cause to be arrested any person who in his presence commits a non-bailable and cognizable offence, or any
proclaimed offender, and, without unnecessary delay, shall make over or cause to be made over any person so
arrested to a police officer, or, in the absence of a police officer, take such person or cause him to be taken in
custody to the nearest police station.

(2) If there is reason to believe that such person comes under the provisions of section 41, a police officer
shall re-arrest him.

(3) If there is reason to believe that he has committed a non-cognizable offence, and he refuses on the
demand of a police officer to give his name and residence, or gives a name or residence which such officer has
reason to believe to be false, he shall be dealt with under the provisions of section 42; but if there is no
sufficient reason to believe that he has committed any offence, he shall be at once released.

44. Arrest by Magistrate.—(1) When any offence is committed in the presence of a Magistrate, whether
Executive or Judicial, within his local jurisdiction, he may himself arrest or order any person to arrest the
offender, and may thereupon, subject to the provisions herein contained as to bail, commit the offender to
custody.

(2) Any Magistrate, whether Executive or Judicial, may at any time arrest or direct the arrest, in his
presence, within his local jurisdiction, of any person for whose arrest he is competent at the time and in the
circumstances to issue a warrant.

45. Protection of members of the Armed Forces from arrest.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in sections 41 to 44 (both inclusive), no member of the Armed Forces of the Union shall be arrested for
anything done or purported to be done by him in the discharge of his official duties except after obtaining the
consent of the Central Government.

(2) The State Government may, by notification, direct that the provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply to
such class or category of the members of the Force charged with the maintenance of public order as may be
specified therein, wherever they may be serving, and thereupon the provisions of that sub-section shall apply as if
for the expression “Central Government” occurring therein, the expression “State Government” were substituted.

46. Arrest how made.—(1) In making an arrest the police officer or other person making the same shall
actually touch or confine the body of the person to be arrested, unless there be a submission to the custody by
word or action:

1[Provided that where a woman is to be arrested, unless the circumstances indicate to the contrary, her
submission to custody on an oral intimation of arrest shall be presumed and, unless the circumstances
otherwise require or unless the police officer is a female, the police officer shall not touch the person of the
woman for making her arrest.]

(2) If such person forcibly resists the endeavour to arrest him, or attempts to evade the arrest, such police
officer or other person may use all means necessary to effect the arrest.

(3) Nothing in this section gives a right to cause the death of a person who is not accused of an offence
punishable with death or with imprisonment for life.

1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 7 (w.e.f. 31-12-2009).

42

1[(4) Save in exceptional circumstances, no woman shall be arrested after sunset and before sunrise, and
where such exceptional circumstances exist, the woman police officer shall, by making a written report, obtain
the prior permission of the Judicial Magistrate of the first class within whose local jurisdiction the offence is
committed or the arrest is to be made.]

47. Search of place entered by person sought to be arrested.—(1) If any person acting under warrant of
arrest, or any police officer having authority to arrest, has reason to believe that the person to be arrested has
entered into, or is within, any place, any person residing in, or being in charge of, such place shall, on demand
of such person acting as aforesaid or such police officer, allow him free ingress thereto, and afford all
reasonable facilities for a search therein.

(2) If ingress to such place cannot be obtained under sub-section (1), it shall be lawful in any case for a
person acting under a warrant and in any case in which a warrant may issue, but cannot be obtained without
affording the person to be arrested an opportunity of escape, for a police officer to enter such place and search
therein, and in order to effect an entrance into such place, to break open any outer or inner door or window of
any house or place, whether that of the person to be arrested or of any other person, if after notification of his
authority and purpose, and demand of admittance duly made, he cannot otherwise obtain admittance:

Provided that, if any such place is an apartment in the actual occupancy of a female (not being the persons
to be arrested) who, according to custom, does not appear in public, such person or police officer shall, before
entering such apartment, give notice to such female that she is at liberty to withdraw and shall afford her every
reasonable facility for withdrawing, and may then break open the apartment and enter it.

(3) Any police officer or other person authorised to make an arrest may break open any outer or inner
door or window of any house or place in order to liberate himself or any other person who, having lawfully
entered for the purpose of making an arrest, is detained therein.

48. Pursuit of offenders into other jurisdictions.—A police officer may, for the purpose of arresting
without warrant any person whom he is authorised to arrest, pursue such person into any place in India.

49. No unnecessary restraint.—The person arrested shall not be subjected to more restraint than is
necessary to prevent his escape.

50. Person arrested to be informed of grounds of arrest and of right to bail.—(1) Every police officer
or other person arresting any person without warrant shall forthwith communicate to him full particulars of the
offence for which he is arrested or other grounds for such arrest.

(2) Where a police officer arrests without warrant any person other than a person accused of a non-bailable
offence, he shall inform the person arrested that he is entitled to be released on bail and that he may arrange for
sureties on his behalf.

2[50A. Obligation of person making arrest to inform about the arrest, etc., to a nominated person.—(1)
Every police officer or other person making any arrest under this Code shall forthwith give the information
regarding such arrest and place where the arrested person is being held to any of his friends, relatives or such
other persons as may be disclosed or nominated by the arrested person for the purpose of giving such
information.

(2) The police officer shall inform the arrested person of his rights under sub-section (1) as soon as he is
brought to the police station.

(3) An entry of the fact as to who has been informed of the arrest of such person shall be made in a book to be
kept in the police station in such form as may be prescribed in this behalf by the State Government.

(4) It shall be the duty of the Magistrate before whom such arrested person is produced, to satisfy himself that the
requirements of sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) have been complied with in respect of such arrested person.]

51. Search of arrested person.—(1) Whenever a person is arrested by a police officer under a warrant which
does not provide for the taking of bail, or under a warrant which provides for the taking of bail but the person
arrested cannot furnish bail, and

1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 6 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006).
2. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 7 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006).

43

whenever a person is arrested without warrant, or by a private person under a warrant, and cannot legally be
admitted to bail, or is unable to furnish bail,

the officer making the arrest or, when the arrest is made by a private person, the police officer to whom he
makes over the person arrested, may search such person, and place in safe custody all articles, other than necessary
wearing-apparel, found upon him and where any article is seized from the arrested person, a receipt showing the
articles taken in possession by the police officer shall be given to such person.

(2) Whenever it is necessary to cause a female to be searched, the search shall be made by another female with
strict regard to decency.

52. Power to seize offensive weapons.—The officer or other person making any arrest under this Code may
take from the person arrested any offensive weapons which he has about his person, and shall deliver all weapons so
taken to the Court or officer before which or whom the officer or person making the arrest is required by this Code
to produce the person arrested.

53. Examination of accused by medical practitioner at the request of police officer.—(1) When a person is
arrested on a charge of committing an offence of such a nature and alleged to have been committed under such
circumstances that there are reasonable grounds for believing that an examination of his person will afford evidence as to
the commission of an offence, it shall be lawful for a registered medical practitioner, acting at the request of a police
officer not below the rank of sub-inspector, and for any person acting in good faith in his aid and under his direction, to
make such an examination of the person arrested as is reasonably necessary in order to ascertain the facts which may
afford such evidence, and to use such force as is reasonably necessary for that purpose.

(2) Whenever the person of a female is to be examined under this section, the examination shall be made only
by, or under the supervision of, a female registered medical practitioner.

1[Explanation.—In this section and in sections 53A and 54,—
(a) “examination” shall include the examination of blood, blood stains, semen, swabs in case of sexual

offences, sputum and sweat, hair samples and finger nail clippings by the use of modern and scientific
techniques including DNA profiling and such other tests which the registered medical practitioner thinks
necessary in a particular case;

(b) “registered medical practitioner” means a medical practitioner who possesses any medical qualification
as defined in clause (h) of section 2 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956) and whose name has
been entered in a State Medical Register.]

2[53A. Examination of person accused of rape by medical practitioner.—(1) When a person is arrested on a
charge of committing an offence of rape or an attempt to commit rape and there are reasonable grounds for believing
that an examination of his person will afford evidence as to the commission of such offence, it shall be lawful for a
registered medical practitioner employed in a hospital run by the Government or by a local authority and in the absence
of such a practitioner within the radius of sixteen kilometres from the place where the offence has been committed, by
any other registered medical practitioner, acting at the request of a police officer not below the rank of a sub-inspector,
and for any person acting in good faith in his aid and under his direction, to make such an examination of the arrested
person and to use such force as is reasonably necessary for that purpose.

(2) The registered medical practitioner conducting such examination shall, without delay, examine such person
and prepare a report of his examination giving the following particulars, namely:—

(i) the name and address of the accused and of the person by whom he was brought,
(ii) the age of the accused,
(iii) marks of injury, if any, on the person of the accused,
(iv) the description of material taken from the person of the accused for DNA profiling, and
(v) other material particulars in reasonable detail.

(3) The report shall state precisely the reasons for each conclusion arrived at.

1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 8, for the Explanation (w.e.f. 23-6-2006).
2. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 23-6-2006).

44

(4) The exact time of commencement and completion of the examination shall also be noted in the report.

(5) The registered medical practitioner shall, without delay, forward the report to the investigating officer, who
shall forward it to the Magistrate referred to in section 173 as part of the documents referred to in clause (a) of
sub-section (5) of that section.]

1[54. Examination of arrested person by medical officer.—(1) When any person is arrested, he shall be
examined by a medical officer in the service of Central or State Government, and in case the medical officer is not
available, by a registered medical practitioner soon after the arrest is made:

Provided that where the arrested person is a female, the examination of the body shall be made only by or under
the supervision of a female medical officer, and in case the female medical officer is not available, by a female
registered medical practitioner.

(2) The medical officer or a registered medical practitioner so examining the arrested person shall prepare the
record of such examination, mentioning therein any injuries or marks of violence upon the person arrested, and the
approximate time when such injuries or marks may have been inflicted.

(3) Where an examination is made under sub-section (1), a copy of the report of such examination shall be
furnished by the medical officer or registered medical practitioner, as the case may be, to the arrested person or the
person nominated by such arrested person.]

2[54A. Identification of person arrested.—Where a person is arrested on a charge of committing an offence
and his identification by any other person or persons is considered necessary for the purpose of investigation of such
offence, the Court, having jurisdiction may, on the request of the officer in charge of a police station, direct the
person so arrested to subject himself to identification by any person or persons in such manner as the Court may
deem fit:]

3[Provided that, if the person identifying the person arrested is mentally or physically disabled, such process of
identification shall take place under the supervision of a Judicial Magistrate who shall take appropriate steps to
ensure that such person identifies the person arrested using methods that person is comfortable with:

Provided further that if the person identifying the person arrested is mentally or physically disabled, the
identification process shall be videographed.]

55. Procedure when police officer deputes subordinate to arrest without warrant.—(1) When any officer in
charge of a police station or any police officer making an investigation under Chapter XII requires any officer
subordinate to him to arrest without a warrant (otherwise than in his presence) any person who may lawfully be
arrested without a warrant, he shall deliver to the officer required to make the arrest an order in writing, specifying
the person to be arrested and the offence or other cause for which the arrest is to be made and the officer so
required shall, before making the arrest, notify to the person to be arrested the substance of the order and, if so
required by such person, shall show him the order.

(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall affect the power of a police officer to arrest a person under section 41.

4[55A. Health and safety of arrested person.—It shall be the duty of the person having the custody
of an accused to take reasonable care of the health and safety of the accused.]

56. Person arrested to be taken before Magistrate or officer in charge of police station.—A
police officer making an arrest without warrant shall, without unnecessary delay and subject to the
provisions herein contained as to bail, take or send the person arrested before a Magistrate having
jurisdiction in the case, or before the officer in charge of a police station.

57. Person arrested not to be detained more than twenty-four hours.—No police officer shall

1. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 8, for section 54 (w.e.f. 31-12-2009).
2. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 11 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006).
3. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 12 (w.e.f. 3-2-2013).
4. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 9 (w.e.f. 31-12-2009).

45

detain in custody a person arrested without warrant for a longer period than under all the circumstances of
the case is reasonable, and such period shall not, in the absence of a special order of a Magistrate under
section 167, exceed twenty-four hours exclusive of the time necessary for the journey from the place of
arrest to the Magistrate’s Court.

58. Police to report apprehensions.—Officers in charge of police stations shall report to the District
Magistrate, or, if he so directs, to the Sub-divisional Magistrate, the cases of all persons arrested without
warrant, within the limits of their respective stations, whether such persons have been admitted to bail or
otherwise.

59. Discharge of person apprehended.—No person who has been arrested by a police officer shall
be discharged except on his own bond, or on bail, or under the special order of a Magistrate.

60. Power, on escape, to pursue and retake.—(1) If a person in lawful custody escapes or is
rescued, the person from whose custody he escaped or was rescued may immediately pursue and arrest
him in any place in India.

(2) The provisions of section 47 shall apply to arrests under sub-section (1) although the person
making any such arrest is not acting under a warrant and is not a police officer having authority to arrest.

1[60A. Arrest to be made strictly according to the Code.—No arrest shall be made except in
accordance with the provisions of this Code or any other law for the time being in force providing for
arrest.]